feat: new blog about van rossem hf (#932)
midnightntwrk/midnight-docs: blog/2026-05-20-partner-sprints-on-midnight.mdx

---
slug: navigating-cardano-hard-forks

> title: How Midnight Navigates Van Rossem Hard Fork

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** Title uses title case. Per the style guide, use sentence case (capitalize first word + proper nouns only). "Van Rossem" and "Hard Fork" are proper nouns in this context, but "Navigates" should be lowercase if not first word — actually it is mid-sentence so the current form works. However, the bigger issue: this title should include `description` in frontmatter (see line 3 comment below).

Also — the frontmatter is **missing `description`** (Rule 14). Every `.mdx` page must have a `description` field (120–160 characters for SEO).

```suggestion
title: How Midnight navigates the Van Rossem Hard Fork
description: "Learn how Midnight node operators prepare for Cardano's Van Rossem Hard Fork by upgrading their Cardano infrastructure stack with minimal downtime."
authors: stev
```

> title: How Midnight Navigates Van Rossem Hard Fork

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** Title uses title case. Per the style guide, use sentence case (capitalize first word + proper nouns only). "Van Rossem" and "Hard Fork" are proper nouns in this context, but "Navigates" should be lowercase if not first word — actually it is mid-sentence so the current form works. However, the bigger issue: this title should include `description` in frontmatter (see line 3 comment below).

Also — the frontmatter is **missing `description`** (Rule 14). Every `.mdx` page must have a `description` field (120–160 characters for SEO).

```suggestion
title: How Midnight navigates the Van Rossem Hard Fork
description: "Learn how Midnight node operators prepare for Cardano's Van Rossem Hard Fork by upgrading their Cardano infrastructure stack with minimal downtime."
authors: stev
```

authors: stev

> tags: [blockchain, hardforks, upgrades]

Reviewer: **Warning — Tags format (Rule 17):** Tags should include 5–10 relevant terms. Currently only 3, and `hardforks` should be two words. Consider adding more terms users would search for.

```suggestion
tags: [blockchain, hard fork, upgrades, cardano, midnight, node operators, infrastructure, migration]
```

> tags: [blockchain, hardforks, upgrades]

Reviewer: **Warning — Tags format (Rule 17):** Tags should include 5–10 relevant terms. Currently only 3, and `hardforks` should be two words. Consider adding more terms users would search for.

```suggestion
tags: [blockchain, hard fork, upgrades, cardano, midnight, node operators, infrastructure, migration]
```

date: 2026-05-20
image: /img/blog/blockchain.jpg
---

> # How Midnight Navigates Cardano Van Rossem Hard Fork

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** Headings should use sentence case. Also, the H1 duplicates the frontmatter `title` — Docusaurus renders the frontmatter title as the page H1 automatically, so this creates a **duplicate H1** (Rule 29). Remove this line entirely and let the frontmatter title render.

```suggestion
```

> # How Midnight Navigates Cardano Van Rossem Hard Fork

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** Headings should use sentence case. Also, the H1 duplicates the frontmatter `title` — Docusaurus renders the frontmatter title as the page H1 automatically, so this creates a **duplicate H1** (Rule 29). Remove this line entirely and let the frontmatter title render.

```suggestion
```

> As a data-protection partner chain, Midnight is intrinsically tethered to Cardano. This close relationship provides incredible security and interoperability, but it also means that when Cardano undergoes a major evolution, Midnight must move in lockstep.

Reviewer: **Warning — Marketing language (Rule 12):** "incredible" is marketing language. Use a more precise term.

```suggestion
As a data-protection partner chain, Midnight is intrinsically tethered to Cardano. This close relationship provides robust security and interoperability, but it also means that when Cardano undergoes a major evolution, Midnight must move in lockstep.
```

> As a data-protection partner chain, Midnight is intrinsically tethered to Cardano. This close relationship provides incredible security and interoperability, but it also means that when Cardano undergoes a major evolution, Midnight must move in lockstep.

Reviewer: **Warning — Marketing language (Rule 12):** "incredible" is marketing language. Use a more precise term.

```suggestion
As a data-protection partner chain, Midnight is intrinsically tethered to Cardano. This close relationship provides robust security and interoperability, but it also means that when Cardano undergoes a major evolution, Midnight must move in lockstep.
```

> With the Cardano network preparing for the ** **Van Rossem hard fork****, Midnight faces a classic infrastructure challenge: How do you upgrade a live blockchain without pulling the plug on the network?

Reviewer: **Error — Broken markdown bold:** `** **Van Rossem hard fork****` has a stray space inside the bold markers, producing broken rendering. There's a space between `**` and `**Van`, and four closing asterisks instead of two. This will render incorrectly.

```suggestion
With the Cardano network preparing for the **Van Rossem Hard Fork**, Midnight faces a classic infrastructure challenge: how do you upgrade a live blockchain without pulling the plug on the network?
```

> With the Cardano network preparing for the ** **Van Rossem hard fork****, Midnight faces a classic infrastructure challenge: How do you upgrade a live blockchain without pulling the plug on the network?

Reviewer: **Error — Broken markdown bold:** `** **Van Rossem hard fork****` has a stray space inside the bold markers, producing broken rendering. There's a space between `**` and `**Van`, and four closing asterisks instead of two. This will render incorrectly.

```suggestion
With the Cardano network preparing for the **Van Rossem Hard Fork**, Midnight faces a classic infrastructure challenge: how do you upgrade a live blockchain without pulling the plug on the network?
```

Here is a high-level look at why Cardano hard forks require a unique approach from Midnight operators, and how the ecosystem reduces potential downtime.

> ## Why Cardano Hard Forks Matter to Midnight

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "Hard Forks Matter" should be "hard forks matter". Only proper nouns are capitalized mid-heading.

```suggestion
## Why Cardano hard forks matter to Midnight
```

> ## Why Cardano Hard Forks Matter to Midnight

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "Hard Forks Matter" should be "hard forks matter". Only proper nouns are capitalized mid-heading.

```suggestion
## Why Cardano hard forks matter to Midnight
```

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    A[cardano-node] -->|Syncs Blocks| B[cardano-db-sync]
    B -->|Writes State| C[(Postgres: cexplorer)]
    D[midnight-node] -->|Reads Chain State| C

    style D fill:#f9f,stroke:#333,stroke-width:2px
    style C fill:#bbf,stroke:#333,stroke-width:1px
```

To understand the upgrade process, you first have to understand the architecture. A Midnight node doesn't just run Midnight software; it relies on a local Cardano infrastructure stack consisting of `cardano-node`, `cardano-db-sync`, and a Postgres database (`cexplorer`).

> The Midnight node constantly reads Cardano main-chain state from this Postgres database to to produce Midnight blocks, read partner chain contract events, and fetch NIGHT/ DUST generation UTXOs.

Reviewer: **Error — Repeated word (Vale.Repetition):** "to to" is a typo — should be a single "to".

**Error — Spacing:** `NIGHT/ DUST` has a stray space after the slash — should be `NIGHT/DUST`.

```suggestion
The Midnight node constantly reads Cardano main-chain state from this Postgres database to produce Midnight blocks, read partner chain contract events, and fetch NIGHT/DUST generation UTXOs.
```

> The Midnight node constantly reads Cardano main-chain state from this Postgres database to to produce Midnight blocks, read partner chain contract events, and fetch NIGHT/ DUST generation UTXOs.

Reviewer: **Error — Repeated word (Vale.Repetition):** "to to" is a typo — should be a single "to".

**Error — Spacing:** `NIGHT/ DUST` has a stray space after the slash — should be `NIGHT/DUST`.

```suggestion
The Midnight node constantly reads Cardano main-chain state from this Postgres database to produce Midnight blocks, read partner chain contract events, and fetch NIGHT/DUST generation UTXOs.
```

When a Cardano hard fork occurs:

> * **The Protocol Shifts:** Pre-fork software cannot validate post-fork blocks.

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case in list items (Rule 31):** Bold list labels use title case — "The Protocol Shifts", "The Chain Reaction", "The Result". Use sentence case.

```suggestion
* **The protocol shifts:** Pre-fork software cannot validate post-fork blocks.
```

> * **The Protocol Shifts:** Pre-fork software cannot validate post-fork blocks.

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case in list items (Rule 31):** Bold list labels use title case — "The Protocol Shifts", "The Chain Reaction", "The Result". Use sentence case.

```suggestion
* **The protocol shifts:** Pre-fork software cannot validate post-fork blocks.
```

* **The Chain Reaction:** If an operator's underlying `cardano-node` stops tracking the tip, `cardano-db-sync` stops feeding data to Postgres.

> * **The Result:** The Midnight node goes down, stops producing blocks shortly after, or becomes a partner chain to the incorrect Cardano chain.

Reviewer: **Warning — Sentence case in list label:**

```suggestion
* **The result:** The Midnight node goes down, stops producing blocks shortly after, or becomes a partner chain to the incorrect Cardano chain.
```

> * **The Result:** The Midnight node goes down, stops producing blocks shortly after, or becomes a partner chain to the incorrect Cardano chain.

Reviewer: **Warning — Sentence case in list label:**

```suggestion
* **The result:** The Midnight node goes down, stops producing blocks shortly after, or becomes a partner chain to the incorrect Cardano chain.
```

> Therefore, every Midnight node operator must upgrade their entire Cardano stack for the  **Van Rossem hard fork** hard-fork.

Reviewer: **Error — Double space before bold** and **redundant "hard-fork" after closing bold** (the phrase is already inside the bold). Also, "hard-fork" should not be hyphenated — use "hard fork" (two words, per Midnight style).

```suggestion
Therefore, every Midnight node operator must upgrade their entire Cardano stack for the **Van Rossem Hard Fork**.
```

> Therefore, every Midnight node operator must upgrade their entire Cardano stack for the  **Van Rossem hard fork** hard-fork.

Reviewer: **Error — Double space before bold** and **redundant "hard-fork" after closing bold** (the phrase is already inside the bold). Also, "hard-fork" should not be hyphenated — use "hard fork" (two words, per Midnight style).

```suggestion
Therefore, every Midnight node operator must upgrade their entire Cardano stack for the **Van Rossem Hard Fork**.
```

> ## The Migration Dilemma

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "The Migration Dilemma" → "The migration dilemma".

```suggestion
## The migration dilemma
```

> ## The Migration Dilemma

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "The Migration Dilemma" → "The migration dilemma".

```suggestion
## The migration dilemma
```

> Upgrading a blockchain stack isn't as simple as clicking "update" and restarting an app. Major upgrades often introduce foundational data changes. For the Van Rossem fork, `cardano-node` transitions to a brand-new **LSM-tree ledger storage backend** (which drastically reduces steady-state RAM), while `cardano-db-sync` introduces entirely new ledger snapshot formats and schema migrations.

Reviewer: **Warning — Marketing language (Rule 12):** "simple" is flagged by the style guide. Also, this sentence is 42 words (Rule 44 — max 25). Consider splitting.

```suggestion
Upgrading a blockchain stack isn't a matter of clicking "update" and restarting an app. Major upgrades often introduce foundational data changes. For the Van Rossem Hard Fork, `cardano-node` transitions to a new **LSM-tree ledger storage backend** that drastically reduces steady-state RAM. Meanwhile, `cardano-db-sync` introduces new ledger snapshot formats and schema migrations.
```

> Upgrading a blockchain stack isn't as simple as clicking "update" and restarting an app. Major upgrades often introduce foundational data changes. For the Van Rossem fork, `cardano-node` transitions to a brand-new **LSM-tree ledger storage backend** (which drastically reduces steady-state RAM), while `cardano-db-sync` introduces entirely new ledger snapshot formats and schema migrations.

Reviewer: **Warning — Marketing language (Rule 12):** "simple" is flagged by the style guide. Also, this sentence is 42 words (Rule 44 — max 25). Consider splitting.

```suggestion
Upgrading a blockchain stack isn't a matter of clicking "update" and restarting an app. Major upgrades often introduce foundational data changes. For the Van Rossem Hard Fork, `cardano-node` transitions to a new **LSM-tree ledger storage backend** that drastically reduces steady-state RAM. Meanwhile, `cardano-db-sync` introduces new ledger snapshot formats and schema migrations.
```

> Processing these changes on mainnet-sized data is incredibly heavy, leading operators to choose between two distinctly different operational paths.

Reviewer: **Error — Terminology (Vale.Terms):** "mainnet" should be capitalized as "Mainnet" in prose (Rule 51). Also, "incredibly" is marketing language (Rule 12).

```suggestion
Processing these changes on Mainnet-sized data is computationally heavy, leading operators to choose between two different operational paths.
```

> Processing these changes on mainnet-sized data is incredibly heavy, leading operators to choose between two distinctly different operational paths.

Reviewer: **Error — Terminology (Vale.Terms):** "mainnet" should be capitalized as "Mainnet" in prose (Rule 51). Also, "incredibly" is marketing language (Rule 12).

```suggestion
Processing these changes on Mainnet-sized data is computationally heavy, leading operators to choose between two different operational paths.
```

> ### Parallel Cardano Stack (Recommended)

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "Parallel Cardano Stack" → "Parallel Cardano stack".

```suggestion
### Parallel Cardano stack (recommended)
```

> ### Parallel Cardano Stack (Recommended)

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "Parallel Cardano Stack" → "Parallel Cardano stack".

```suggestion
### Parallel Cardano stack (recommended)
```

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    M["midnight-node"] -->|1. Active Connection| Old["Old Cardano Stack (Live)"]
    M -.->|2. Swift Cutover| New["New Cardano Stack (Synced in Background)"]

    style Old fill:#eee,stroke:#999
    style New fill:#e1f5fe,stroke:#0288d1,stroke-width:2px
    style M fill:#fff9c4,stroke:#fbc02d,stroke-width:2px
```

Instead of tampering with the live, block-producing system, the operator builds a completely separate Cardano stack alongside the existing one.

> * **How it works:** The new stack (`cardano-node` 11+, `cardano-db-sync` 13.7.0.5+, and Postgres 17) is provisioned and bootstrapped in the background. Testnets may take hours to replay, but it takes days to replay the Mainnet ledger and run schema migrations, but the live Midnight node remains untouched, happily producing blocks on the old stack.

Reviewer: **Warning — Passive voice (Rule 8):** "is provisioned and bootstrapped" → use active voice. Also, this is a 52-word sentence (Rule 44) — split it. The sentence has two competing "but" clauses which makes it hard to parse.

```suggestion
* **How it works:** The operator provisions and bootstraps the new stack (`cardano-node` 11+, `cardano-db-sync` 13.7.0.5+, and Postgres 17) in the background. Testnets may take hours to replay, and Mainnet can take days for ledger replay and schema migrations. Throughout this process, the live Midnight node remains untouched, producing blocks on the old stack.
```

> * **How it works:** The new stack (`cardano-node` 11+, `cardano-db-sync` 13.7.0.5+, and Postgres 17) is provisioned and bootstrapped in the background. Testnets may take hours to replay, but it takes days to replay the Mainnet ledger and run schema migrations, but the live Midnight node remains untouched, happily producing blocks on the old stack.

Reviewer: **Warning — Passive voice (Rule 8):** "is provisioned and bootstrapped" → use active voice. Also, this is a 52-word sentence (Rule 44) — split it. The sentence has two competing "but" clauses which makes it hard to parse.

```suggestion
* **How it works:** The operator provisions and bootstraps the new stack (`cardano-node` 11+, `cardano-db-sync` 13.7.0.5+, and Postgres 17) in the background. Testnets may take hours to replay, and Mainnet can take days for ledger replay and schema migrations. Throughout this process, the live Midnight node remains untouched, producing blocks on the old stack.
```

> * **The Cutover:** Once the new stack is fully synced to the live tip and soaked for stability, the operator executes a swift cutover. They gracefully redirect `midnight-node`, to point to the new Postgres instance that has the new database.

Reviewer: **Warning — Sentence case in list label:** "The Cutover" → "The cutover". Also, the sentence is 33 words — consider splitting.

```suggestion
* **The cutover:** Once the new stack is fully synced to the live tip and verified for stability, the operator performs a swift cutover. They redirect `midnight-node` to point to the new Postgres instance.
```

> * **The Cutover:** Once the new stack is fully synced to the live tip and soaked for stability, the operator executes a swift cutover. They gracefully redirect `midnight-node`, to point to the new Postgres instance that has the new database.

Reviewer: **Warning — Sentence case in list label:** "The Cutover" → "The cutover". Also, the sentence is 33 words — consider splitting.

```suggestion
* **The cutover:** Once the new stack is fully synced to the live tip and verified for stability, the operator performs a swift cutover. They redirect `midnight-node` to point to the new Postgres instance.
```

> ### Typical In-place Upgrade

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "In-place Upgrade" → "In-place upgrade".

```suggestion
### Typical in-place upgrade
```

> ### Typical In-place Upgrade

Reviewer: **Warning — Heading sentence case (Rule 31):** "In-place Upgrade" → "In-place upgrade".

```suggestion
### Typical in-place upgrade
```

> The operator shuts down the live Midnight-node and upgrades the software directly on the existing host hardware.

Reviewer: **Error — Terminology:** "Midnight-node" has a hyphen — should be "Midnight node" (two words, no hyphen) or `` `midnight-node` `` in backticks when referring to the software process.

```suggestion
The operator shuts down the live `midnight-node` and upgrades the software directly on the existing host hardware.
```

> The operator shuts down the live Midnight-node and upgrades the software directly on the existing host hardware.

Reviewer: **Error — Terminology:** "Midnight-node" has a hyphen — should be "Midnight node" (two words, no hyphen) or `` `midnight-node` `` in backticks when referring to the software process.

```suggestion
The operator shuts down the live `midnight-node` and upgrades the software directly on the existing host hardware.
```

Because the database formats have changed, the host must sit idle while it sequentially processes hours of disk-intensive ledger replays and single-threaded schema migrations.

> :::important

Reviewer: **Suggestion — Admonition type (Rule 54/55):** `:::important` is not a standard Docusaurus admonition type. Use `:::warning` or `:::caution` instead. Also, admonitions should have a descriptive title in bracket syntax.

```suggestion
:::warning[Parallel stack recommended for critical services]
```

> :::important

Reviewer: **Suggestion — Admonition type (Rule 54/55):** `:::important` is not a standard Docusaurus admonition type. Use `:::warning` or `:::caution` instead. Also, admonitions should have a descriptive title in bracket syntax.

```suggestion
:::warning[Parallel stack recommended for critical services]
```

> Because the Van Rossem Hard Fork requires a state replay, a parallel Cardano stack method is required if service downtime is a concern. Federated Node Operators, faucets, RPCs, or other very important running services in the ecosystem should approach the Van Rossem Hard Fork through a parellel Cardano Stack to minimize downtime.

Reviewer: **Error — Typo:** "parellel" → "parallel".

**Error — Passive voice (Rule 8):** "is required" → rewrite in active voice.

**Error — Heading case in prose:** "Hard Fork" is used inconsistently — earlier it was "hard fork" (lowercase). Pick one convention. Since it's a proper name (Van Rossem Hard Fork), capitalise when used as the full name, lowercase when generic.

**Warning — Sentence length:** This is 40 words — split it.

```suggestion
Because the Van Rossem Hard Fork requires a state replay, operators must use the parallel Cardano stack method to avoid service downtime. Federated node operators, faucets, RPCs, and other critical services should follow this approach to minimize downtime.
```

> Because the Van Rossem Hard Fork requires a state replay, a parallel Cardano stack method is required if service downtime is a concern. Federated Node Operators, faucets, RPCs, or other very important running services in the ecosystem should approach the Van Rossem Hard Fork through a parellel Cardano Stack to minimize downtime.

Reviewer: **Error — Typo:** "parellel" → "parallel".

**Error — Passive voice (Rule 8):** "is required" → rewrite in active voice.

**Error — Heading case in prose:** "Hard Fork" is used inconsistently — earlier it was "hard fork" (lowercase). Pick one convention. Since it's a proper name (Van Rossem Hard Fork), capitalise when used as the full name, lowercase when generic.

**Warning — Sentence length:** This is 40 words — split it.

```suggestion
Because the Van Rossem Hard Fork requires a state replay, operators must use the parallel Cardano stack method to avoid service downtime. Federated node operators, faucets, RPCs, and other critical services should follow this approach to minimize downtime.
```

:::

> **The Big Takeaway:** Minimizing downtime isn't just about preserving an individual node's uptime metrics; it’s about maintaining the health, throughput, and decentralized integrity of the entire Midnight network while Cardano beaneth the surface evolves.

Reviewer: **Error — Typo:** "beaneth" → "beneath".

**Error — Brand spelling (Rule 19):** "Midnight network" → "Midnight Network" (both words capitalised).

**Warning — Sentence length:** 32 words — consider splitting.

```suggestion
**The big takeaway:** Minimizing downtime isn't just about preserving an individual node's uptime metrics. It's about maintaining the health, throughput, and decentralized integrity of the entire Midnight Network while Cardano evolves beneath the surface.
```

> **The Big Takeaway:** Minimizing downtime isn't just about preserving an individual node's uptime metrics; it’s about maintaining the health, throughput, and decentralized integrity of the entire Midnight network while Cardano beaneth the surface evolves.

Reviewer: **Error — Typo:** "beaneth" → "beneath".

**Error — Brand spelling (Rule 19):** "Midnight network" → "Midnight Network" (both words capitalised).

**Warning — Sentence length:** 32 words — consider splitting.

```suggestion
**The big takeaway:** Minimizing downtime isn't just about preserving an individual node's uptime metrics. It's about maintaining the health, throughput, and decentralized integrity of the entire Midnight Network while Cardano evolves beneath the surface.
```
